reproduction major this board is going
our Vicki I'm gonna interrupt you know
the Prime Minister has just appeared
let's hear what he has to say good
evening and thank you for joining us for
this latest down history press
conference first of all I want to update
you on the latest data in our fight
against coronavirus I can report through
the government's ongoing testing and
monitoring program that as of today 1
million 920 1770 tests for coronavirus
have now been carried out in the UK
including 100,000 490 tests carried out
yesterday two hundred and twenty three
thousand and sixty people have tested
positive that's an increase of three
thousand eight hundred and seventy-seven
cases since yesterday eleven thousand
four hundred and one people are
currently in hospital with coronavirus
down from eleven thousand seven hundred
and sixty eight the previous day and
sadly of those tested positive for
coronavirus across all settings 30 2016
I'd that's an increase of 210 fatalities
since yesterday
this figure includes deaths in all
settings not just in hospitals before we
begin questions from the public and from
the media I just want to remind people
of a number of important things I said
in my address to the nation last night
and can we have the first slide please
first in order to monitor our progress
we are establishing a new co vid alert
level system the kovat alert level has
five levels each relating to the level
of threat posed by the virus the level
will be primarily determined by the
r-value and the number of coronavirus
in turn that kovat alert level will
determine the level of social distancing
measures in place the lower the level
the fewer the measures the higher the
level the stricter the measures
throughout the period of lockdown which
started on March the 23rd
we've been at level four meaning a kovat
nineteen epidemic is in general
circulation and transmission is high or
rising exponentially thanks to the hard
work sacrifices of the British people in
this lockdown we've helped to bring the
our level down a number of infections
down and were now in a position to begin
moving to level three in steps next
slide please
and we set out the first three steps we
will take carefully to modify the
measures gradually ease the lockdown and
begin to allow people to return to their
way of life but crucially while avoiding
what would be a disastrous second peak
that overwhelms the NHS after each step
we will closely monitor the impact of
that step on the are and the number of
infections and all the available data
and will only take the next step when we
are satisfied that it is safe to do so
so step one from this week those who
cannot work from home should now speak
to their employer about going back to
work
you can now spend time outdoors and
exercise as often as you like you can
meet one person outside of your
household outside outdoors provided you
stay two metres apart the
distancing measures remain absolutely
crucial to us keeping the infection rate
and the number of cases down as low as
we possibly can so step two from june
the first at the earliest
we aim as long as the data allows it we
aim for primary schools to reopen for
some pupils in smaller class sizes
non-essential retail to start to reopen
when and where it's safe to do so
cultural and sporting events to take
place behind closed doors without crowds
and then step three no later than July
the fourth and again only if the data
says it is safe
we aim to allow more businesses and
premises to open including potentially
those offering a personal care such as
leisure facilities public places and and
places of worship many of these
businesses will need to operate in new
ways to ensure they're safe and we will
work with these sectors on how to do
this so given we've taken the first step
in carefully adjusting some of the
measures today and therefore our advice
to people what to do we've also updated
our messaging we're now asking people to
stay alert control the virus and save
lives and yes staying alert for the vast
majority of people still means staying
at home as much as possible but there
are a range of other actions we're
advising people to take as we modify our
measures people should stay alert by
working from home if you can limiting
contact with other people keeping
distance if you go out two meters apart
where possible washing your hands
regularly wearing a face covering when
you're in an enclosed spaces and where
it's different
to be socially distant for example in
some shops or on public transport and if
you or anyone in your household has
symptoms repeat you all need to self
isolate because if everyone stays alert
and follows the rules we can control
coronavirus by keeping the are down and
reducing the number of infections and
this is how we can continue to save
lives and livelihoods as we begin as a
nation to recover from coronavirus and
I'm now going to go to questions from
the the public and the the media and I
don't think either CSO or CMA again to
see am I going to say anything at this
stage again we're gonna go straight to
questions
and beginning with Scott who has a
question from Devon
can we see friends and family at the
park if we practice social distance
rules what if they're already at the
park when we get there should we leave
or can we stay and talk if we keep to
the social distance rules thank you well
thank you very much Scott what was
saying ask Kristen and Patrick to to
comment what we're saying is that you
can go to the park to exercise on your
own certainly in an unlimited way you
can go with members of your your own
household but if you want to meet
somebody from outside your household
it's got to be you and that other person
just as a pair and you should observe
social distancing while you're there and
so it should be it should be basically a
one-on-one thing but with social
distancing so keeping two meters apart
and and obeying the rules but Chris I
mean just to reiterate what the Prime
Minister has said really what we're
trying to do is to take very small steps
which allow us to be
sure that we're not going to end up with
an increase in transmission again and
these are the first steps which allow
much more exercise and activities
outdoors and this is for two reasons
there are three reasons and in in
additionally the first one is that it is
very important for people to uptake
exercise whenever they can that's very
good for health generally also good for
mental health as well and the second is
we recognize we're going to have to do
changes for a long period of time and
making things sustainable is extremely
important and the third reason is that
the scientists on the sage group looked
at this and are confident that the risks
of transmission outdoors are much lower
than the risks of transmission indoors
but they are not zero so we therefore
want to take these modest steps one
stage at a time and that's why the
ministers and the government have
decided to make this small change it's
an important change but does not lead to
people meeting with multiple people
outside their household at once yes so
so Chris just to to get to exactly what
Scott was was asking you I think what he
was saying was can we go meet lots of
members of our family in the park if
each and is in each member as
individually spaced two metres apart and
our answer to that at the moment is that
pushing it too far correct so you can
meet other people in the park but it
should be a one other person from
another household and observing social
distancing patrie is anything you want
no that's exactly right and it's
important that we take these very small
steps because that's the way we're going
to know what the effect is we can
monitor it we can see what act what
effect that's having on the are and on
the numbers and only by knowing that
that's a small difference can we then
move to the next step so doing this step
by step
monitoring carefully measuring is a
crucial part of how we take this forward
and it's it's vital to repeat what we
were saying earlier with the coded alert
level system if we think that the alert
level is in danger of going
again then that's going to mean that we
cannot proceed with the the steps that
we've outlined in our roadmap will be
we'll be forced to be frank with
everybody and and hold off and we won't
be able to deliver stages two and three
in the steps two and three the pace that
they're currently set out to do let's go
to Simon in Essex where schools have
remained accessible to children of key
workers are they now expected to allow
children to return where their parents
are from industries they're being
actively encouraged to return to work
such as construction manufacturing etc
if not how do you propose these people
return to work if there's no childcare
available Thanks thanks very much
Simon and first of all I want to pay
tribute to the teachers and the schools
who have been going throughout this
crisis looking after at least some kids
of some vulnerable children's of omble
pupils and some kids some pupils of of
essential workers what we're saying now
is that if we continue in the same way
then were hoping to begin to open
primary schools at the earliest by June
the first and so reception a year one
and yes six will come back in for
primary schools well hope by the end of
July for all primary school pupils to
have at least one month of of Education
and we hope that we'll be able to as I
say to get those those children back
into into school and yes what we do want
is people who from now people who cannot
work from home who whose jobs do require
them to to go to work to talk to their
employers about doing that and again I
just remind you that throughout the the
crisis construction lots of businesses
actually have
kept going and they've done so in a way
that is safe and secure
for their workers were there in
construction or manufacturing lots of
offices have have kept going but as we
as we go forward now as we encourage
people who can't work from home to work
to think of going to work to get in
touch with their employers about going
to work the key thing is that those
places of employment should be safe and
there's guidance that were publishing
today and tomorrow about how to make
places of work
Kovach secure how to make transport
kovat secure and it's only on that basis
Simon that we'll be encouraging people
to go back to work when they can't work
from home and your point about and not
having access to childcare is is a
crucial one obviously if people don't
have access to childcare and they've got
a child who you know isn't back in
school for one reason rather yet can't
get the back until the 1st of June or
even then they're not they don't fall
into the the years we're getting back
immediately then I think it's only fair
to regard that as an obvious barrier to
their ability to go back to work and and
that I'm sure that employers will agree
with that so stay at home if you can but
go to work now
if you if you have no alternative
thank you very much Simon we get a pooja
in Solihull good afternoon yesterday
like the nation with more questions and
answers when lockdown initially started
you were very specific about what needed
to shut down and when
why have you been so baked with who can
start back at work and which businesses
can reopen this week when will a British
public receive further clarity on this
well thank you very much
pooja I think that the frank answer to
your your excellent question is that and
I think that I think everybody gets is
we've had to make a a big big change in
our lives over the last couple of months
and everybody's got the clarity of the
message what we said is basically stay
at home and the British public heard
that message loud and clear and in the
UK people have stayed at home
overwhelmingly and that's been a good
thing in terms of delivering our ability
to to combat the disease and to get the
R the rate of transmission done but it's
a very obviously very simple message
really it couldn't be star cast at home
now it's when you come to to take small
steps back to normality as we are now
that clearly the message becomes finer
more more complicated and I hope Pooja
that when you listen to what we're
saying tonight you do get what we're
saying we're saying that if you can't
work from home you should talk to your
employer about getting back to work
we've mentioned various sectors
construction manufacturing and other
scientific research and others where
people can't work from home and we're
insisting that it's got to be safe at
work and safe to get there and they were
also making some changes this week about
exercised other than that puja things
are pretty much as they as they have
been and they will be until we start to
make probe further progress driving down
that are and getting to steps two and
three that I outlined earlier but as
Patrick says all this is totally
conditional all that future progress is
conditional on our collective effort
to continue to beat the disease and and
drive down the are any well I think just
to add that when we when the when the
regulations were first introduced
essentially they were firms and
companies were divided into things that
were essential should keep operating say
things like pharmacies things like
supermarkets things that definitely
should not very explicitly and then some
between where it was dependent on
whether they could be made safe for work
and that remains the case today there
are but what is changing is the sense of
emphasis but those three groups remain
the same groups essential things which
are open things that should stay shut
and then things where if they can be
adapted than may be possibilities to
open things up that's exactly right and
pooja I want to stress that I don't
think any of us expect that tomorrow or
the rest of this this week there's going
to be a sudden big flood of people back
to work but I think a lot of people will
now start to think whether they fall
into that category whether maybe they
could think about going back to work
whether it's time to ring up their
employer to check about the arrangements
and so on so we're taking baby steps if
you if you like and we think that's the
right way to do it where we have some
leeway now the British public have
worked we've all worked together to
drive VR down we've made huge progress
in combating the disease so you know now
is the moment it makes it makes sense
for us all as a country now is the
moment to make tweaks to use that
progress and to allow us to go back to
work where we can where that's where
that's feasible and and to do provided
we can do it in a in a safe way we're
gonna go now to members of the media and
first we have Laura Coons Berg of the
BBC thank you very much prime minister
as we just heard from Pooja a lot of
people felt your speak
last night raised as many questions as
it gave answers there are a prime
minister of different instructions for
people in different parts of the UK you
can see your colleagues if you go to
work but grandparents can't look after
their children many employers say
they're just not ready to have people
back to work yet so what do you say the
millions of people watching right now
who may well be a bit perplexed by what
you're actually trying to say and what
they are meant to do and if I could ask
professor witty and sir Padgett balance
if they approved the change from a stay
at home to stay alert message thank you
well Laura I think pooja really rather
brilliantly anticipated your question if
I may if I may say so and she you know
that the the the answer is that and I
totally I get where you're where you're
coming from yes of course the message
that we were giving out initially was
incredibly clear and incredibly stark
and the UK population actually obeyed it
more thoroughly perhaps and many other
populations around the world they we
really did stay at home and as I say
we've now made so much progress in
combating the disease and pushing the r
down that we need to make progress if we
possibly can in in relaxing some of the
measures very very cautiously and the
way we're going to do it in the in in
this initial phase is to is to
re-emphasize what we said before which
was that if you can't work from home
then you should know think about going
to work provided you do it provided your
workplace is a covert secure and
provided you can travel safely to work
as well and well obviously when it comes
to to transport we're very keen that
there isn't a huge crush on public
transport it simply won't have the
capacity because we've got to maintain
social distancing measures on public
transport that will greatly reduce the
capacity of everybody has to be 2 metres
apart
all our public trials that doesn't mean
public transport can't operate we want
to have we want to be running more more
capacity more tubes more trains if we
possibly can but it does mean that
people really should think about
alternatives about either going by car
or walking or by bicycle using
alternative means to get to work and
science has had input to the whole plan
we've been particularly concentrated on
the three phases to make sure that those
three phases are properly grouped and
also and I've said this already the
conditionality is crucially important
it's very very important that this is
done slowly and it's done carefully and
we don't rush to measures that could
push the are above one and therefore
it's also important that there's a
measurement system in place and that
measurement system can allow us to track
what is happening with the numbers
numbers of infection and the are and
that's why the alert system that's in
place that's going to be put in place in
order to measure this is a crucial part
of it to be able to know where we are
and it is obviously true that we must
all be alert during this in terms of
hand-washing in terms of social
distancing in terms of understanding
what role we play because if we allow
this to get out of control if we allow
the transmission to increase between
households then we go back to where we
were and more measures come in so it's
crucially important that during this
phase we do not view this as suddenly a
change where all things are okay it's
the steps that have been announced which
are okay and then you move to the
further ones I mean just broadly we've
been involved at all stages of the
process throughout the whole process
neither spattering nor I would visit
ourselves to becomes expert so we're not
going to get involved in actual details
of actually cons strategies but we are
involved in the overall strategic things
and we have been at every stage thank
you very much and and for those who you
know who think that Nora that the
the stay alert is is not the right mr. I
think it's absolutely the right message
for our for our country now and I'm
interested that just today in in France
they've they've gone for a Logan survey
Devi heuristic who don't which is as I'm
sure everybody knows is roughly the same
the same sort of thing as I miss and I
think it's the right way to go could we
go to Beth Rigby please in that's guy
Thank You Prime Minister we've learnt a
lot about this disease in the past few
weeks and you acknowledge today that we
may never find a vaccine that's rather
different to what you said or March the
19th when you said this would be finite
isn't it the case that this could be
infinite should we be preparing for our
changes to our lives not just in 2020
but permanently and and so Patrick if I
may you've now tested 1.4 million people
for coronavirus nearly quarter of a
million people have tested positive
that's about 15 percent of those tested
do you now have some idea about what the
level of infection is across the UK
thank you well Beth I mean ver - ver
very good questions and of course you
know I hope hope hope that we will
achieve a virus and actually you know
I'm hearing some very encouraging things
from what's going on at at Oxford sorry
to achieve a vaccine and and develop a
vaccine that can because I can defeat
the the virus and I'm hearing all sorts
of positive noises but you know you're
perfectly right Beth to point out that
this is by no means guaranteed I'm going
to hand over to Patrick and Chris in a
minute because they know they know you
know a huge amount about vaccines I
believe I'm right in saying that even
after 18 years we still don't have a
vaccine for SARS and what I can tell you
what I think sure you've heard many
times is that the UK is in the forefront
of concerting into
national activity to try to deliver a
vaccine if I you know look back at
what's happened in the last two months I
think for a lot of the time you saw
countries really going out on their own
doing things individually we want as the
UK to be bringing countries together as
far as we can for this next phase to be
to be developing vaccines together to be
developing strategies together and we're
putting huge sums now into finding that
vaccine and we'll work with partners
across the world but yes Beth you know
if you ask me I might absolutely certain
that we won't be living with this for a
long time to come I can't I can't say
that it may be that we have to become
ever more flexible ever more agile ever
more ever smarter in the way that we
tackle and not just this infection but
potentially future infections as well
but I'd hand over to Patrick on the
vaccine and I think you can never
guarantee you're gonna get a vaccine
it's a tough thing to do I will say
there's been great progress made though
there is a number of vaccine programs
around the world which are progressing
there are a number in the clinic now so
far so good and so I think the chances
are a bit higher than they were that you
get a vaccine but you never know until
you've got one in terms of other options
though there are therapeutics and drug
development programs are underway I'd be
surprised if we didn't end up with
something know that you you gonna end up
with a therapeutic or a vaccine or
potentially both but you can't guarantee
that you're gonna get a vaccine that
would be my message and I think it's
very encouraging a huge amount of effort
that's going in in the UK and around the
world on that in terms of the question
about the numbers of people the ONS
study which is an ongoing study trying
to measure the number of people in the
population with infection suggests at
the moment that the number might be
somewhere around 130,000 people quite
why intervals around that so you can't
it's not a precise number it could be
lower it could be 65 or 70 thousand it
could be higher up to two
50 but 136,000 is the central estimate
for that and then on top of that if you
look at some of the serology coming back
so the antibody tests and these are now
all a bit out of date because the way
they get tested is we've got some data
from a couple of weeks ago and if you
think about it those people would have
had an infection three weeks before that
so you're looking back in time there it
looks like in London it might be from
that time maybe ten percent people
positive for antibody suggesting that's
the sort of range of infection and
across the country different levels in
different places but on average
somewhere around four percent something
like that so those numbers will get
updated as we get more information and
the ONS study will continue to give you
information but it suggests it's that
sort of magnitude at the moment around
130,000 or so people may currently have
infection and because the R is less than
one that should be coming down and the
having time maybe something like two
weeks at the moment of course we had we
had a doubling time of about four days
we had a doubling the time between three
and four days and that again emphasizes
the importance if you take the brakes
off too fast and in the wrong way you
accelerate fast out of this and that's
what we thought to avoid Chris sorry I
mean just one additional thing to say
which is if you look back a hundred
years infectious diseases was still very
dominant and if you went back further
the dominant say in medicine we humans
have proved remarkably successful at
tackling almost all major infections
that have we've had by some means or
another sometimes vaccines sometimes
drugs sometimes public health measures
I'm very confident we will find a
solution to this this latest threat but
and the but of this is it will take time
science takes time and therefore we have
to take a careful stance at the moment
because we cannot guarantee when we're
going to find those solutions thanks
very much
can we go to Alex in the thanks Beth can
we go to Alex in the in the Lake
District Street
will there be a limit on how far people
are allowed to travel for their exercise
as if not surely people will just flock
to smooth the worst-hit areas such as
the Lake District which is surely
neither safe nor wise Alex thank you
very much and a lot of people have been
asking this what we're saying is that we
want people to be able to use the
outdoors to be able to exercise in an
unlimited way outdoors but they've got
to obey social distancing so there can't
be any question of people just going off
for holidays for staying in places like
the Lake District if if they do go to
exercise it's got to be done with social
distancing if they're going to be more
than one it's going to be members of
their own of your own household and of
course as we've said before if you are
going to to meet anybody else in that
open space it's got to be one-on-one and
again exercising social distancing so if
it's a somebody not from your household
it can't it's got to be just you and
that other person and not your household
and that other person I hope that's I
hope that's clear
okay thank you thank you very much could
we go on can we go to Megan in Nuneaton
please have the restrictions for the
vulnerable and those at high risk varied
initially the over 70 is the pregnant
and those who certain have conditions
were told to shield for 12 weeks have
those restrictions eased for them well
Megan thank you very much my the first
thing I would say is actually the what
we said to over 70s who in my experience
are often in rude robust health was they
should take care but we didn't say that
they should be be shielded so though yes
of course there's about a million people
who are particularly vulnerable as
serious underlying health conditions who
we are trying to look after very
carefully indeed there I'm afraid we
must still protect them as I as I said
last night but I think over 70s need to
understand they need to take take care
but it's it's not quite right to say
that they're that they're shielded all
the rules of social distancing of course
apply to them and applied particularly
strongly to them but otherwise they can
go about their lives Chris I mean just
to add to that and so dividing between
these very high-risk groups these shield
leaders the prime minister said and the
vulnerable which is a larger group it is
important that people continue to
maintain either the shielding thing if
they're in the very very high group or
take more even more caution than the
general public
if they're in the vulnerable group
because although the risk of the virus
has gone down in the community it is
still significantly out there as the
Patrick was saying earlier on and
therefore this would not be the time I
think to start revisiting those bits of
advice yes and I think there's just one
I think bit of data that Patrick
mentioned that is right I think you I
think I heard you say 4% of the
population they look like about 4% of
the population outside the capital might
have got the or had the virus i when you
think about how low that figure is I
think it tells all of us how strongly we
need to maintain our discipline our
social distancing there are large
numbers of huge numbers of people in
this country who could be infected by
this that's why we've got to take a very
very cautious approach the baby steps
that were taking Natasha from Richmond
good afternoon we're just seeing family
again fits into the roadmap out of
lockdown and how is it logical that I as
a primary school teacher can mix with
the many returning children but seeing
my relatives are still not allowed well
Natasha thank you very much and thank
you for everything you're doing as a as
a teacher and and and have done and will
do throughout this this period I think I
just have to go back to what we were
saying at the at the beginning that
there are new flexibilities to ensure
that people can see somebody who isn't
in there
they're their household but you have to
do it one-on-one outdoors and obeying
social distancing so there is new scope
to see one other member of your family
somewhere outdoors and it may not sound
like much but given what we've all been
saying thus evening I hope you
understand the the constraints were all
under we have to keep this disease at
bay we have to advance very gradually
and Natasha just to say on on what
you're doing is as a primary school
teacher and thank you for that we will
do everything we can to make sure that
teachers parents children can have total
confidence that we're going to make
those schools that your working
environment as safe as possible and
we'll be publishing guidelines to make
schools Kovac Kovac secure but Chris is
anything you can say to answer because
Natasha does on the face of it have a
you know a legitimate question that
she's asking that so the the first thing
to say about our schools is in a sense
there are three separate risks that
people are concerned about in terms of
schools one of them is risk to children
and although sadly there are a very
small number of children who do get
severe disease actually it is extremely
small the risk the one good thing about
this virus and it is really only one
good thing is very very low in children
which is in contrast to many other
infectious diseases so the risk to
children is very very low
the second question is is this is having
primary schools come back going to lead
to a significant upswing or a change in
the our and this has been modeled very
carefully by Sage and so Patrick might
want to add to this but the view is if
it's done very carefully that's done
slowly then it is very unlikely to do
that but it would have to has to be done
very very carefully and Patrick may wish
to add to that that comment very very
slowly
the third thing is that teachers and
parents are understandably concerned
about individual risk and that's very
much what we're consulting on at the
and with the profession and it is very
important that we have a proper debate
debate around that to make sure people
understand that we can do many things to
reduce the risk as with all of society
with an infectious disease you can never
reduce the risk completely to zero and
that's not a realistic aspiration but we
can reduce the risk very significantly
the biggest thing though to reduce the
risk is to get the virus down that makes
the risk lower low for everyone in the
community just to add a little bit to
that we said on the way in that actually
schools are relatively small part of the
overall spread they're not nothing but
they are relatively small part
therefore now in terms of key workers
and and vulnerable children in at school
that's okay that's the bit that's done
now we didn't recommend from Sage that
primaries came back now there's got to
be a bit more time to see that there's
room to be able to do that in terms of
the changes and as the Prime Minister is
laid out that would be done in a very
staged way so it's not all primaries
coming back it's some classes it's
reduced class sizes that allows that to
be monitored so that the effect can be
seen so it's not as simple as to say
everything comes back now and the ours
okay it needs to be done carefully
step-by-step and measured thanks very
much
Patrick can we go to thank so Tasha can
we go to John in Midlothian please we've
so many conflicting statements between
yourself and Scotland who do I know
listening to as you and my prime
minister and we are all United Kingdom
well John thank you very much and let's
be absolutely clear that the what I've
said just now is that we have a
situation in the UK where the disease
the epidemic is at different stages in
in different places and it's entirely
right that different devolved
administration's are taking slightly
different approaches to deal with the
epidemic in their their nation and we
respect that and support that when you
look at the totality of the approach I
really think that actually the unit of
unity between us is far more significant
than the differences and I can tell you
that every member of Cobra that was
there yesterday everybody from all four
devolved and all four nations was
absolutely determined to have a uk-wide
solution to this and and I've no doubt
that we will achieve that but you've got
a respect local issues local flare-ups
local problems and part of the solution
is going to be as we go forward we will
be responding John with with local
responses so if there's a flare-up in a
particular part of the country in a town
in a village which we detect with our
coded alert system then we will be we
will be firefighting doing whack Amole
to deal with that issue as it arises so
having a local regional national
approach makes sense but it also makes
sense to have a strong UK approach as
well thanks very much let's go to Peter
in Derry different to that of yours
whether or not they control plants at
borders for those entering those nations
from England I will thanks Peter the
answer to that is is no the common
travel area will remain obviously for
with between the UK and Ireland
there'll be no no checks nothing is
intelligent in between Ireland and
Northern Ireland and similarly you
wouldn't expect anything between GB and
Northern Ireland I think possibly the
most useful what we really want people
to do in this country is to look at our
social distancing measures across the
that we're proposing in all all four
nations totally
understand what those social distancing
measures are and apply them with common
sense so the 2 meter rule how you
address people how you how you interact
with people these are these are ways in
which we can push down this virus and I
think it's the common sense of the
British people that has been so crucial
the whole of the UK in getting the yard
and everybody understood roughly what to
do in the first phase and it's by
applying common sense that I think will
be successful in this second phase as
well thank you very much we round off
with two more questions from the media
can we go to Tommy from done of the Sun
Tom Thank You Prime Minister
millions would have seen your roadmap
today and seen what it meant for their
jobs people in nightclubs aviation the
tourism sector all these sectors that
quite frankly going to really struggle
to ever get their jobs back there be
very worried by this there's talk
already of a lost generation of young
people who are going to be losing their
jobs and really struggle ever to get
into work if they're leaving our
education this summer can you share some
of your future thinking because these
people aren't gonna be held by an
extension of the furlough scheme is it
time now to start talking about a jobs
guarantee scheme or a national
retraining scheme and to the CMO and the
CSA you've done a very good job he would
appear of ramming home the the threat
and the danger so far of the virus of
your statistics but is it now time to
stop explaining the public or punching
new statistics that that might alleviate
some of the concern and fear for example
the recovery rate we're one of the few
countries in the world that don't seem
to publish the amout of people who are
recovering or a day-by-day basis which
you start looking about for Tom can I
first of all say that actually one of
the things that people perhaps don't
make enough of is that this country has
been absolutely unique in the world in
the way that we've tried to keep people
people on Modest ting people in
hospitality in in retail in the in in
this in the sectors
in tourism in this very sectors you
mentioned tom we've kept them in funds
through the the furthering a scheme
through the coronavirus job retention
scheme it's been absolutely crucial
there's been nothing like it around the
world six and a half million people have
been supported and we believe in it plan
one of the things that one of the
differences between this crisis and 2008
is we really do want to look after the
the working people in this country look
after people who need our help there are
there are our priority and look you're
totally right in what you say we are
gonna have to think about the economy
differently as we go forward but I
wouldn't be quite as pessimistic as as
you about some of these some of these
sectors I do believe that they will
recover we have as you know we have an
ambition to get at least some
hospitality going by July the fourth
that will be that will be a tough ask it
will be hard to achieve and it depends
on a great deal of conditionality that
I've set out but that's the that's the
ambition that's the target that we're
setting so at least some of the the jobs
the groups that you mentioned there will
start to come back and then over them
over the medium term I've absolutely no
doubt that the UK economy is immensely
resilient and and will come back but
we're gonna have to think a lot more
about to get back to the question Beth
Rigby asked which is very good we have
to think if we can't get a vaccine fast
we're gonna have to think a lot more
about how we make our businesses our
lives
Kovach secured whilst continuing with
economic activity but we're a very
ingenious Bunch the Brits I'm sure will
I'm sure we'll find ways forward and
that's what we intend to do on the
second one certainly I have tried and
Patricks tried right from the beginning
to balance two things the seriousness of
this virus as an epidemic and it clearly
is a very serious epidemic but equally
the fact that actually the great
majority of people will not die from
this and I'll just repeat something I
said right at the beginning because I
think it's worth reinforcing most people
what a significant portion of the
or will not get as far as at all at any
point in the epidemic which is going to
go on for a long period of time of those
who do some of them will get the virus
without even knowing it they will have
the virus with no symptoms at all
asymptomatic carriage and we know that
happens of those who get symptoms the
great majority probably 80% will have a
mild or moderate disease might be bad
enough for them to have to go bed to bed
for a few days not bad enough them to
have to go to the doctor
an unfortunate minority will have to go
as far as hospital but the majority of
those will just need oxygen and will
then leave hospital and then a minority
of those will end up having to go to
severe and critical care and some of
those sadly will die but that's a
minority it's 1% or possibly even less
than 1% overall and even in the highest
risk group this is significantly less
than 20% I the great majority people
even the very highest groups if they
catch this virus will not die and I've
really wanted to make that point really
clearly and if you look at the curves
the second point because of the work
that the whole country is done these are
coming down the deaths are coming down
the numbers of people intensive care are
coming down deaths in care homes are
coming down these are all very positive
things so absolutely want to reinforce
that sense perspective but that doesn't
mean you can get away from the fact that
if we did not do anything if we left
this virus to run we would be back in a
very serious situation that would
threaten many lives and threaten the NHS
so it's getting those two messages
absolutely unbalanced and I fully agree
with you you have to give both the
messages not just the one much
information out as we can and so the
more information we've got that we can
get out the better so people can
understand where we are thanks very much
Chris and Patrick and thank you Tom so
you want to come back yes please just
very quickly then isn't it time to then
start bubbling down your recovery rates
do you know for example now how many
people in the country have recovered
from the virus and now perfectly healthy
again such as the prime minister example
well we have we have data obviously
didn't everybody for the reasons Chris
has said
a large number of people have been
asymptomatic or haven't gone to the
doctor but we do have recovery rates
they are available and I see I see no
reason why they shouldn't be made
available yes we certainly have Hospital
yes so we have in a sense what we have
and this is where I wouldn't want people
to you over read them it's important
they're perfectly open data or actually
is perfectly supposed to get hold of
them if people want is we have data on
the people who got as far as Hospital
how many of those left Hospital but of
course there are the very severe end of
the spectrum all the ones I was talking
about before that point they make a full
recovery they don't enter the statistics
now they increasingly will enter the
statistics now that we have a better
testing capacity that means that we're
picking out more of the milder cases in
the community but I think what you know
if people look at those to get back to
your point what I wouldn't want is for
people then to say oh well that's and in
the end the mortality rate is higher
than I expected that's because the
recovery rates we have are four people
who were severe enough to get to
hospital and that's even so that is in
majority so it is important that each
sentence is read in that context thanks
very much Tom I hope that but I'm sure
that the hospital recovery rates are
readily available which I should
certainly supply those thanks very much
last questions from Heather Stewart of
the Guardian Heather hi I'm low skilled
low paid workers have been four times
more likely to die from this disease
than professionals and many more of
those low skilled workers are in
industries where they'll be actively
encouraged to return from when to work
from Wednesday and not gals much tougher
if you're in a small accommodation
without God and maybe you don't have the
nannies or the cleaners or in the help
being allowed to to return to work to
help from that to help those who are
working from home working from home can
you understand why some people feel the
burden of this prices is wrong unfairly
on the poor and I just wanted one to
quit II just quickly you talked about
the science there of children's
involvement in transmitting the disease
I just wondered whether we will see that
when we'll be able to see that before
the first batch of kids return to school
Cosby or not on the first of June yes
I'm sorry Heather look very good
question and it we've got to look very
carefully at the end of this but you
all the impact this has had on society
which people have been particularly
hard-hit and there's no question that it
is it is it is falling hardest on on
certain groups and you're right to to
point that out and we're going to need
to to address our it may it just make a
couple of points about about what we're
proposing this week and what we're doing
I want to be clear that yes in saying
that people who can't work from home
should now go to work we are absolutely
categorical that their workplace your
workplace must be safe must be coded
secure and if and employers will not be
allowed to get away with forcing people
to work in conditions that are not coded
secure everybody must in a bay social
distancing and we're going to have a lot
more inspections by the Health and
Safety Executive will have a random spot
inspections to to check that companies
are doing the right thing and if people
feel that they are that they're they're
being made to work in conditions that
are work they find themselves in
conditions that they think are unsafe
then they should immediately report it
and we will take action and that goes
for all all work but I want to stress
them this is we're not expecting this
week a huge change were simply
encouraging those in those in those
sectors that we've outlined who can't
work from home now to talk to their
employers their employers and and to go
to work and just just on your your point
about the burden falling on on working
people well I just I remind you of what
this country has done virtually uniquely
to support working people through the
following scheme through the the
coronavirus job retention scheme it is
quite a remarkable thing that we've done
but it's right and we're protecting
people's jobs were protecting people's
lives and people's livelihoods and I
think it's entirely right that we've
done it
we've done it that way sorry Chris I
mean there Patrick will want to add an
additional point what I'm about to say
that there are basically three questions
within what you've just said there's do
children have to get severe disease
youngster is very rarely not never
but those data are all very secure and I
think it's widely accepted lots of
studies from multiple countries the
second question is do do children
transmit the virus in significant
numbers and if so does age make a
difference so is there a difference
between younger children and older
children and that's still uncertain
that's still being looked at quite
carefully in lots of different places
but the then the third question is do
schools actually contribute
significantly to an increase in the are
they do contribute a certain amount and
this is what's been modeled very
carefully by saje and this is the thing
that Patrick might wish to talk about
but as I think you know both what Sir
Patrick as chair of stage and me as
co-chair in this area we're both very
committed to the idea of publication of
all of these sons behind Sage and that's
happening never as fast as people want
but the fact is that is happening and
clearly that is an important part of the
scientific endeavor yeah it's very keen
together and most of the data on this is
in the public domain
I usually what other countries have done
you can see the information on both the
very low rates of severe disease as
Chris has said but also in terms of do
children become infected as much they
certainly don't become infected more and
there's some evidence to suggest they
might become infected less not very
secure at the moment do they transmit
more no might they transmit less
possibly that's again not entirely clear
and do they at a young age act as less
of a transmission between households in
terms of their behaviors and patterns of
contacts yes they do a bit and and so
that's that's the sort of evidence that
we're looking at and we'll make all our
papers open as we we've pledged to do
thank you very much
Patrick thank you Heather thank you all
thank you
[Music]
see the headlines as they happen and
watch BBC News live in the app and get
the full story with BBC dog code at UK
forward slash news follow the story for
all the latest with BBC News